Content-Type: text/x-zim-wiki
Wiki-Format: zim 0.4
Creation-Date: 2023-07-11T01:45:28+05:00

====== Farooq Bandial PTI joined ======
Created Tuesday 11 July 2023

Islamabad (May 31, 2018): The Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI) on Thursday welcomed Farooq Bandial to the party only to expel him a few hours later following a heavy backlash on social media directed at the new entrant’s criminal past.

Farooq Bandial, who hails from Punjab’s Khushab district, was handed a death sentence by a Special Military Court in 1979 for committing “armed dacoity” at the house of film actress Shabnam in Gulberg area of Lahore.

Shabnam, the poster girl of Lollywood in the 1970s, left Pakistan for her native Bangladesh in the late 1990s.

Meanwhile, some social media users claimed that Bandial was among the five men who allegedly assaulted the actress at her residence in 1978.

Earlier, the PTI chairman took strict notice of reports suggesting that a convicted criminal recently joined his party, PTI spokesman Fawad Chaudhry said Thursday.

The spokesman said that a one-member committee comprising Naeemul Haque had been constituted to probe the matter, which would present all the facts to the PTI chief within three days.

“PTI will not compromise on ethical standards in any condition,” a statement from the spokesman earlier said.

	چئرمین تحریک انصاف عمران خان نے ان اطلاعات کا سخت نوٹس لیا ہے جن کے مطابق ایک سزا یافتہ مجرم تحریک انصاف کا حصہ بنا ہے ، نعیم الحق پر مبنی ایک رکنی کمیٹی تین دنوں میں حقائق چئرمین کے سامنے رکھے گی، تحریک انصاف کسی صورت اخلاقی معیارات پر سمجھوتہ نہیں کرے گی

	— Fawad Hussain (@fawadchaudhry) May 31, 2018

Minutes later, Haque took to Twitter to announce that Bandial had been expelled from the party “with immediate effect”.

Terming his entry into the party “unfortunate”, Haque said: “We have no place for people with such record in our party.”

	Farooq Bandials entry into PTI was unfortunate. He has been expelled from the party with immediate effect. We have no place for people with such record in our party. He should not even be in any political party.

	— Naeem ul Haque (@naeemul_haque) May 31, 2018

“He should not be in any political party,” he added.

Earlier, severe criticism was meted out on social networking platforms over issuance of images of Farooq Bandiyal, a transporter from Khushab, joining the PTI.

Reports on social media alleged that Bandiyal had been involved in a robbery and rape at the residence of renowned actress Shabnam.

Bandiyal was also sentenced to death for his involvement in the robbery and rape case, during the reign of Zia-ul-Haq.The case surfaced in 1978. The actress has her flick ‘Aina’ released around those days.

The suspects were also accused of a robbery at the residence of another actress Zamurd, among other crimes. They were later caught and sentenced to death by a military court.

However, Shabnam, through her lawyer SM Zafar, had appealed for reducing Bandiyal and other convicts’ punishment.

Two days, PTI chairman Imran Khan himself had included Bandiyal to PTI ranks by placing a party-coloured muffler on his shoulders.
