Content-Type: text/x-zim-wiki
Wiki-Format: zim 0.4
Creation-Date: 2023-07-10T22:50:34+05:00

====== Justice for Zainab Timeline of the Kasur rape, murder case that gripped the nation ======
Created Monday 10 July 2023

Zainab Amin was a name unfamiliar to all Pakistanis apart from the six-year-old family's up until January, 2018.

She went missing on Jan 4 and five days later, a police constable deputed to trace the girl recovered her body from a heap of trash near the Shahbaz Khan Road.

Police said the girl seemed to have been killed four or five days earlier.

Being the 12th such incident to occur within a 10 kilometre radius in Kasur in one year, Zainab's rape and murder had sparked outrage and protests across the country.

The heinous nature of the crime had seen immediate riots break out in Kasur — in which two people were killed — while #JusticeforZainab became a rallying cry for an end to violence against children.

Below is a timeline of the case that had shook the nation and forced the government into action in finding the serial rapist and killer. 

Timeline of the Zainab Amin rape-murder case
Jan 4: Six-year-old Zainab Amin goes missing in Kasur. Her family files an FIR a day later.
Jan 9: Zainab's body is recovered from a trash heap by a police officer. Riots break out in Kasur.
Jan 13: DNA testing of crime scene samples indicate culprit involved in at least seven other similar cases.
Jan 23: Police declare arrest of prime suspect 24-year-old Imran Ali in rape-murder case.
Feb 12: ATC hands Imran Ali death sentence on four counts in Zainab case following a four-day jail trial at Kot Lakhpat Jail, Lahore. Ali pleads not guilty.
Feb 20: Imran Ali challenges his conviction in the Lahore High Court.
March 20: LHC rejects Imran Ali's appeal, upholds trial court's conviction.
June 12: Supreme Court rejects Imran Ali's appeal against conviction.
Oct 10: President Arif Alvi rejects Imran Ali's plea for clemency.
Oct 12: ATC issues death warrant for Imran Ali in Zainab rape-murder case.
Oct 17: Imran Ali is hanged at Kot Lakhpat Jail.

